# Sparkify AWS Redshift ETL

The following project is part of UDACITY - Data Engineer Nanodegree. It consist in creating an ETL from data sources stored in JSON to a AWS Redshift database. 


### Project Description

A music streaming startup, Sparkify, has grown their user base and song database and want to move their processes and data onto the cloud. Their data resides in S3, in a directory of JSON logs on user activity on the app, as well as a directory with JSON metadata on the songs in their app.

The project consist in building an ETL pipeline that extracts their data from S3, stages them in Redshift, and transforms data into a set of dimensional tables

### Datasources

##### Song Dataset
The first dataset is a subset of real data from the Million Song Dataset. Each file is in JSON format and contains metadata about a song and the artist of that song. The files are partitioned by the first three letters of each song's track ID. For example, here are filepaths to two files in this dataset.

##### Song Dataset
The second dataset consists of log files in JSON format generated by this event simulator based on the songs in the dataset above. These simulate activity logs from a music streaming app based on specified configurations.

The log files in the dataset you'll be working with are partitioned by year and month.


### Execution Instructions

1. Create a **credentials.cfg** with your AWS User KEY and SECRET. The structure of the file should be similar to the **credentials_empty.cfg** file found under utils folder. The AWS user should have permissions to create other users and assign policies) 
2. Execute **create_enviroment.py** to create a user to access S3 and Redshift, a Redshift cluster, and to open the TCP port. If you wish to change any of the confifurations of the cluster you can modify dwh_original.cfg
3. Execute **create_tables.py** to drop tables if they already exist, and/or create new tables.
4. Execute **etl.py** to run the etl.
5. Once you finish, you can run **delete_environment.py** (CAUTION! It will delete the redshift cluster and all its data).


### Output tables

#### Fact Table
 
- **SONGPLAYS** - records in log data associated with song plays i.e. records with page NextSong - songplay_id, start_time, user_id, level, song_id, artist_id, session_id, location, user_agent

#### Dimension Tables

- **USERS** - users in the app - user_id, first_name, last_name, gender, level
- **SONGS**  - songs in music database - song_id, title, artist_id, year, duration
- **ARTISTS** - artists in music database - artist_id, name, location, latitude, longitude
- **TIME** - timestamps of records in songplays broken down into specific units - start_time, hour, day, week, month, year, weekday

### Sample queries

#### Top 10  Active users
```sql
Select b.user_id, u.first_name ||  u.last_name as name_Surname, b.activity
FROM (SELECT user_id, count(user_id) as activity  
        FROM songplays 
        GROUP BY user_id 
        ORDER BY 2 desc
        LIMIT 10) b
LEFT JOIN users u
ON u.user_id = b.user_id
order by 3 desc
```
<table>
    <tr>
        <th>user_id</th>
        <th>name_surname</th>
        <th>activity</th>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>49</td>
        <td>ChloeCuevas</td>
        <td>772</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>80</td>
        <td>TeganLevine</td>
        <td>740</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>97</td>
        <td>KateHarrell</td>
        <td>595</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>15</td>
        <td>LilyKoch</td>
        <td>495</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>44</td>
        <td>AleenaKirby</td>
        <td>439</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>29</td>
        <td>JacquelineLynch</td>
        <td>381</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>24</td>
        <td>LaylaGriffin</td>
        <td>349</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>88</td>
        <td>MohammadRodriguez</td>
        <td>312</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>73</td>
        <td>JacobKlein</td>
        <td>305</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>36</td>
        <td>MatthewJones</td>
        <td>280</td>
    </tr>
</table>

#### Top listened song
```sql
Select s.title, a.listend_times
FROM (SELECT song_id, count(song_id) as  listend_times  
    FROM songplays p
    GROUP BY song_id 
    ORDER BY 2 desc
    LIMIT 1) a
LEFT JOIN songs s
ON a.song_id = s.song_id
```
<table>
    <tr>
        <th>title</th>
        <th>listend_times</th>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>You&#x27;re The One</td>
        <td>37</td>
    </tr>
</table>